Worked out. Got an hour's tape? It's an hour and a
half. 45 minutes each side. What kind of
information do you need? Well, first of all, you
know, name rank and stuff. I can give you that. My
name is Rod Huddleston. Actually, Rodney. I go by
Rod.
I was... I served in Vietnam as a sergeant. Do you
really want my serial number? I've still
remembered it. You still remember your serial
number? Yes, I do. 20-49-58-4. You never forget
that. Back in those days, we didn't use the Social
Security number. They gave us a service number.
Actually, they called it a serial number. What
were your reasons for joining the military? I
joined during the Cuban crisis when President
Kennedy...
And the going zone in Cuba, we at that time all
thought we were going to war. It looks very real. I
was in college at the time at California
Polytechnic, Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo. I was a
freshman in college. Not doing exceptionally
well in my grades. I thought that was probably the
lesser of two evils. Besides... If you'd like to,
we can start a tab if you'd like. No, it's paying
out. All right. But
I joined. That was the reason I joined. Myself and
several people went down at the same time. In fact,
the induction center in Los Angeles, when we
joined, was about six blocks long for volunteers.
So I was a volunteer.
And you volunteered in what? That was in 1963.
Actually,
the Cuban crisis was over by the time I actually
went in. I had signed up during the Cuban crisis and
then there was a waiting period before they would
come and, you know, you'd have to get your physical
and pull out the papers and so forth. By the time I
actually went in was in January of 63 and the Cuban
crisis had passed by that time. Oh, we were still
excited, but the Navy had already blockaded Cuba.
But I had already joined, so I went into MCRD,
Marine Corps Recruit Depot, San Diego. I was there
for eight weeks, and then another eight weeks of
training at Camp Pendleton, ITR, they called it,
Infantry Training Regiment. And then they gave me
a 15-day leave, and I came back and took advanced
combat training. And while I was in advanced
combat training, there was some kind of a problem
in the demilitarized zone in Korea along the 38th
parallel, so they ended our training rather
abruptly and in the middle of the night they took us
all down to San Diego by truck and bus and every
other conveyance. We got on several large ships
and we went to sea. And some were in the course of
things. We thought we were going to Korea but we
ended up debarking in Hawaii. I got off at Hawaii
and waited in what they call a staging battalion,
which is where they put you when they're waiting to
determine where you go for a few days. I don't
remember how long. It's been too many years ago.
Then I was assigned to the 1st Marine Brigade at
Kaneohe Bay on Oahu as part of a replacement group.
And that became my unit. The 1st Marine Brigade had
as its major infantry arm the 4th Marine Regiment.
It also had, because it was a brigade and it was the
major strike unit in the Pacific Theater at that
time, for instant response, we had our own
artillery and armor and air support.
When the Vietnam situation came about, they moved
us to Okinawa first. And I went to Okinawa with the
4th Marine Regiment. more combat training there,
and it was some rather different type of training
than we'd ever had before. We all knew that
something was up, but we didn't really know what
was up. They were very secretive. In fact, most of
us in those days never heard of Vietnam.
We had barely heard of it in the papers we were
beginning to more and more. The training routine
was 4 o'clock in the morning to 10 o'clock at night.
A lot of bayonet work, a lot of hand-to-hand
combat, a lot of demolitions, a lot of ambush
drills. We had counterinsurgency training,
guerrilla warfare training. We finally loaded
ship off of the capital of Okinawa was Naha, or is
Naha, I should say. We went aboard ships there. We
went into the South China Sea. And we were afloat
for about three months, waiting for the
administration to make up its mind. After three
months on a troop ship, you're ready to invade
anywhere just to get off the ship. Long lines all
day long, standing. They get you up at about 4
o'clock in the morning, and you stand in line for
hours until you can eat breakfast. And when you get
out of what they call on a ship a galley, You have a
few minutes to look out to sea, and then they put you
back in a line again for your midday meal. And then
after your evening meal, it's sleep for a few hours
and get up again and start the whole thing over.
There wasn't really even room for us to do much
physical exercise. There were so many troops on
the ship and so much equipment. We were literally
like sardines. We floated until the decision was
made to apparently land combat troops in Vietnam,
the 4th Marine Regiment. And the 3rd Marine
Regiment and the 9th Marine Regiment, which were
the other two regiments compounding the 3rd
Marine Division, were the first combat troops to
go in to Vietnam. Now, there had been advisors and
some air units that arrived before us. But as far as
actual combat infantry commands, those three
regiments were the first to go in. The combat team
that I was with, they took one battalion out of our
regiment leaving the 2nd Battalion and the 3rd
Battalion. Then they attached another battalion
from the 3rd Marines to us, which was 3rd
Battalion, 3rd Marines. We went ashore May 7,
1965, a place called Chu Lai, South Vietnam, with
three infantry battalions, 3rd Battalion, 3rd
Marines, 2nd Battalion, 4th Marines, 3rd
Battalion, 4th Marines. We had as our direct
mission to provide security for a airfield that
was being built by the Seabees. Seabees is
Civilian Construction Battalion of the Navy. We
were told originally that we would be in this then
Republic of South Vietnam for 10 days, roughly, to
lend support to the government of South Vietnam to
try to stabilize it. They were having some
difficulties, which became very obvious later.
We went ashore expecting a combat situation. We
were fully combat loaded. By that I mean men had
been issued ammunition for their weapons. We had
grenades. We had prior techniques. We had
explosives. We went ashore expecting a fight.
They had told us that the beaches we were landing on
would be defended and hostile. That proved not to
be true. The only South Vietnamese we saw were a
group of young women Six or seven had a large banner
that said, welcome Marines. There was no shooting
when we went ashore the first day. It was the worst
thing that we experienced was the heat. We weren't
used to it. Not that the ships had been that much
more comfortable, but when we landed, we were
carrying our full field transport packs. They had
given us food, ammunition, other supplies that
would supposedly last us 10 days. And we also had
gas masks, shelter halves, Flak jackets, which is
what they call... Steel, steel jackets. Yes,
steel coverable canvas. Actually, it was a Teflon
nylon plate inside a jacket and the little, what
they call drawers or panties to protect you in that
area. A lot of weight to lug around. When we landed,
it was 125 degrees in July. Humidity runs around
100% in the tropics. The first day we went ashore,
we didn't go inland. We just stayed on the beach,
and we got ourselves together, and we helped the
Navy in landing supplies, bringing support
equipment ashore. The second day, we started
marching inland. My particular unit, they
divided battalions up into companies. Each
company was given a mission. We had to secure a hill
west of the airstrip. And I don't recall the name of
the hill now. It had a number, I think. Marching
inland to the hill was about five miles from the
beach. We lost our first man that day. He wasn't in
any activity. He died of heat exhaustion. We were
without water. We landed, each of us carrying two
full canteens, quart size. Most of us drank all of
our water the first day ashore. They didn't
resupply us with water that night or the next day
because all the water had to come from the ships.
And all of the Marines and the Seabees and the
various supporting groups that were in support of
us, there was a lot of men ashore, I think around
10,000 is the figure I heard. The ships could not
distill enough water and transport enough to all
the various units to keep up with the demand. Of
course, we were supposed to be on water rations,
and each man was only supposed to drink so much at a
time, but that was really no problem because for
the second day, none of us had any water anyway. We
had a kid in my platoon started suffering from heat
exhaustion, and we tried our best to cool him, but
there was nothing we could do. The helicopters
from the ships, we called for medevac, but for some
reason, there was a mess up in communications.
They didn't get there in time. That was all of a
shock to us because we were prepared, I think, in
our mind for fighting, but we weren't prepared for
seeing people die of heat exhaustion. It was kind
of a shock, particularly someone that we'd been
with and known for quite some time. After that,
things got kind of blurry in my mind, and I don't
know from what happened from one day to the next. I
know we went out to the hills. and we dug in. We
didn't have concertina wire in the beginning. The
supplies hadn't got on the beach or they couldn't
get them to us. There were not a lot of trucks there
at that time or jeeps. We had just gone ashore
basically with infantry and very little in the way
of support. So we just dug holes. We didn't have
sandbags to fill, to make sandbag bunkers. We just
piled up a parapet of earth around our fighting
holes. For the first few days, Actually, I guess it
would be the better part of the first week. There
was absolutely no enemy activity. There was a lot
of shooting at night. It's because we were
nervous, green, inexperienced, not tried combat
veterans, and we were shooting at shadows. We
didn't know when the enemy would attack, and we
kept seeing signs of enemy activity. By that, I
mean we sent out patrols every day, and we would see
evidence of what we thought where the enemy had
been in villages, and villagers were telling us
that the Viet Cong had been there, but we hadn't
come across them yet. None of us had seen them. We
found... evidence of campsites. We found places
where it looked like maybe defensive positions
had been made at one time or another that may or may
not have been Viet Cong, but everything we saw in
those days we thought was Viet Cong. That's the
nature of inexperienced troops. The first actual
attack we had was a rather minor thing. It wasn't
really a battle at all. I'm not even sure it could be
classified as a skirmish. The Gulf Company 2nd
Battalion, 4th Marines was attacked on an outpost
by small arms. It was a probing attack. There was a
couple of men wounded. I don't think anybody was
killed at that time. A couple of days later, we had a
patrol that was fired upon, sniper, and one man was
killed. I remember that. I didn't know him, but we
heard about it. Bit by bit, our contact with the
enemy started increasing, and it started mainly
in the evening. We started getting very nervous at
night. When the sun would go down, we had to start
watching for attacks, grenade attacks.
snipers would usually operate best right around
twilight sunrise or sunset when people were
relaxed getting up to stretch to go to the bathroom
things like that and we started losing a lot of
people to sniper fire and that they were doing more
danger to us than we were to them at that time we
weren't very successful at taking out the enemy we
hadn't learned their how to how to deal with them i
was involved my own personal contact came after
I'd been ashore for maybe a month. I'd heard and I'd
seen a lot, but I had never fired my weapon
in combat, I guess you'd say, or hostile. I was
leading a patrol. At that time, I was a corporal. I
was with Fox Company, 2nd Battalion, 4th Marines.
I was given an assignment on one morning to take out
a fire team, which was four men. to go down along the
coast about a mile to go inland to a village, I don't
remember the name of it, which was about a mile from
the coast, and then to come back and make it like a
big square and to check this area out. Yeah, it was a
reconnaissance patrol to see if there was any
activity in that area. We ran patrols constantly,
and there were different patrols covering
different parts of the map to make sure that
everything was clear. Again, our major job was to
provide security for the airfield that was being
built at Chu Lai. And all this time that we had been
there, the CBs were working 24 hours a day, hauling
dirt, putting in steel mesh parts to build this
runway.
On this patrol that I was speaking of, we went out,
we were walking along the coast. It was a trail on,
I guess it was like cliffs. You could look down on
inlets of the water, maybe 100 feet below us. And
there was, I recall, some fishermen. And they had
little round boats, one-man boats. The boats were
maybe eight foot across, all black. They would
take a framework of, bamboo and then stretch
canvas or something over it real tight and then tar
it so that it was it would float and they used these
as one-man fishing boats and they were right in
this inlet along the coast and we saw these people
down there didn't pay very much attention to them
all at once we were spread out probably 20 30 meters
between each man it sounded like bees going past my
head. And then I heard a pop. It was at a distance and
with a surf down below. It didn't sound exactly
right, but it was a definite pop, pop, pop kind of a
noise. And I guess instinctively, I don't know, we
all just hit the ground. We threw ourselves to the
ground even before we returned fire. Not very good
troops, but we were being shot at. First time we'd
been shot at. And we returned fire. We were at that
time equipped with M14 rifles. which was firing
7.62 millimeter standard NATO round. We, being
nervous, had all set our rifles with a selector on
full automatic. We all emptied a 20-round
magazine in just a matter of seconds into those
little boats. I don't know exactly which one of
them was doing the firing. If all of them were or one
of them was, I'm not sure. I think I saw one person
with what might have been a carbine, which is a
preferred rifle at that time for the Viet Cong.
It's a light, small weapon. American-made
carbine, World War II vintage carbine. .30
caliber. No, not a machine gun. Usually
semi-automatic. It's a lightweight weapon, and
the Vietnamese loved them. I guess we sold them.
There's War Surfer or something, because they had
plenty of them. This was before we started seeing a
lot of AK-47s. This was the beginning. Anyway, we
fired into this group of fishermen, and Kind of
strange at the time, suddenly realized that
either I or all of us together or some of us had
killed a bunch of people because they were all
dead, kind of floating in the surf. And we
splintered their boats. We went on the rest of the
patrol. We called in on a PRC-6 radio we were
carrying what had happened, and they told us to
continue the patrol, and we did. They sent an H-34
helicopter out and circled over the scene. We saw
them from a distance. They circled a half a dozen
times around, then they flew back. We finished the
patrol. We came in. The company commander called
me up, had a bunch of questions. I gave my report.
It was kind of anti-climatic for my first
experience in combat. That was really all there
was to it. After that, things just kind of
gradually increased in their tempo. The first
major operation that our battalion was involved
in was called Starlight. And it was to the south of
Chiuli on a peninsula. We were operating in
conjunction with the 3rd Battalion, 3rd Marines,
and our sister battalion, the 3rd Battalion, 4th
Marines. Most of the infantry companies of all the
battalions were involved, along with some naval
forces in cooperation offshore. This is supposed
to be the first major battle. The Marines finally
meet the VFBF. This is the first one that I was
involved with, and I think it was the first one of
the war, Operation Starlight. And it went wrong
from the beginning. It was supposed to be a hammer
and anvil attack. By that, I mean that... We were
supposed to have some forces push the enemy forces
into a stationary ambush and either capture or
annihilate the enemy. By this, we had landed by sea
one battalion of Marines, 3rd Battalion, 3rd, had
come in and had dug in along the coast to cut off the
enemy's exit from that direction. Another
battalion went overland by six-by trucks and
Amtrak's. and they pushed in from the land. My
battalion was dropped in by what we called then
vertical envelopment by helicopter assault.
Down the rope? Down the rope. Some of the
helicopters landed. Others we repelled out of
them to get in. The first units repelled. Later, it
was just get out of the helicopter any way you
could. Unfortunately, the LZ, that stands for
landing zone, they picked it right in the
headquarters area of the 1st Regiment of the North
Vietnamese Army, NVA regulars. And they weren't
Viet Cong. They were uniformed professional
troops equipped with Russian or Soviet-made
weapons. You saw his uniform when he killed him?
Yeah, we saw plenty of them. When I was coming out of
the helicopter, my particular chopper was coming
down. I saw across the field a helicopter explode
in the air and bodies falling. Another helicopter
was laying on the ground burning. We jumped out.
probably eight foot above the ground, jumped into
mud, landed in a rice paddy. Fire was coming all
over the place. We were caught in what's called
grazing fire by heavy machine guns. Most of my
platoon was decimated within seconds. Squads
were completely annihilated. People were just
finding people from every kind of outfit and
trying to form some kind of resistance. We had fire
coming into us from the back, the front, and both
sides. We were caught in a criss-cross fire. Two
rifle companies were wiped out in about three
minutes, something like 400 casualties. We
finally consolidated. groups of us survivors
behind dikes and started returning fire and
trying to get some type of a fire superiority.
That's the trick in combat. If you can get fire
superiority, you can overcome an enemy position.
Most of our radio men have been killed. We couldn't
find any PRC-10 radios, which is a heavy radio. We
had a few PRC-6s, but they didn't have the range to
reach the other troops that were from the other
direction. This is a large peninsula. We could not
reach any air units. Most of our forward air
observers had been killed or their radios
destroyed. We had no artillery that we could not
reach by radio. We had no artillery support that we
could reach. We didn't have any air support that we
could reach. So we were totally on our own and cut
off for most of that evening. That evening, only
darkness saved us. That's the only thing. We
managed to consolidate. We tried to drag our
wounded in as best we could. had very few corpsmen
left. We had very few officers left. We had very few
NCOs left. It was just an assemblage of people from
Gulf Company, Hotel Company, Foxtrot Company,
Echo Company, H&S Company. That's headquarters
and support. Wherever you could find a Marine, we
were just getting together in groups. Five men
here, half a dozen men there, three men somewhere
else. We were trying to set up a defensive
perimeter as best we could. The old man, the
battalion commander, was still alive,
fortunately. His name was Lieutenant Colonel
J.R. Fisher. We called him Bull Fisher. And he's
probably the person most deserving for saving
what was left of the battalion. He was a Korean War
and a World War II veteran, and he managed to bring
some type of organization out of shambles. The
next morning, we were organized to the point that
we launched a limited offensive to try to get to a
better position, to get out of that area where we
were. It was an attack launched on our bellies. We
didn't go running and charging on our feet like you
see in the movies. We went forward by skirmishers,
one man at a time, two men covering one,
leapfrogging, getting behind trees, moving up
behind bushes, trying to get fields of fire,
trying to find cover and concealment. we finally
were able to get to some high ground. In the
meantime, our sister battalion, third
battalion, fourth marines was trying to come to
our rescue. Aircraft observers had noted by being
able to see what was happening, even though we
couldn't talk to them, they had given their
reports. Tanks came in, but the tanks were knocked
out by 57 millimeter anti-tank guns of the North
Vietnamese. It was very limited maneuverability
for the tanks because of the mud and the rice
paddies. Finally, about midday, phantom deuces
from carriers offshore came in. That was the first
time that napalm was used in the Vietnam War. They
dropped, they repeated napalm attacks on the
enemy position. The napalm broke their
resistance. We attacked on line, formed a
skirmish line, and assaulted behind the napalm.
We linked up with 3rd Battalion, 3rd Marines on the
beach towards evening. We captured 600 and
something enemy and killed about 1,400. We
consolidated the next two days, cleaning up,
picking up wounded, burying, and trying to
reorganize what was left of our units. That was my
first major operation. After that, we considered
that we were veterans. We all suddenly grew up
overnight. And then from that time on, the
operations just became one after another. You'd
go out on an operation. And I remember writing home
to my folks that I would be going on another
operation. And if I came back, I'd write them when I
got back. It got to be where you didn't want to make
friends anymore because people didn't last that
long. Did you lose most of your men to booby traps
and that kind of stuff? No, most of the men.
Actually, we lost them to everything. We lost them
to sickness. We started getting sick about this
time. Malaria, dysentery, fever of unknown
origins, various kinds, infection. We were
highly susceptible to infections of all kinds.
You'd fall down in bushes, and you'd get cut by
thorns, and then your arm or your leg would become
infected. And it was very hard to rid the infection
in that area. And we couldn't stay clean. And all
this time that I'm speaking of, I had not changed my
utilities from the day I went ashore. We had no
showers. We were still on water rations. Half a
canteen per day per man. That's a half a quart of
water in temperatures of 120 plus degrees.
We lost casualties to everything. Couldn't keep
track of it. We lost casualties to snipers. We lost
casualties to enemy activity. We lost casualties
to sickness. We lost men to the
torments of war. Some people couldn't take the
pressure. Maybe I shouldn't say that, but I guess
that's the truth. After a while, the outfit was no
longer the same outfit that had come from Hawaii.
different group of people. But the ones that came,
pretty soon you got to know them too. We tried not to
make friends, but if somebody stayed around long
enough, you'd get friendly with them anyway. The
old timers got to be less and less, but the
replacements kept coming. There wasn't as many as
there should have been. We always were
understrength. Companies that were supposed to
be 200 men would operate at about average, I guess,
75 or 80 men. Battalions that were supposed to be
1,300 would operate at around 600 or 700. But we did
the job. We kept going. We marched. We kept holding
the position.
A couple of more operations, and I don't remember
their name. There was one, I do remember one,
called Operation Cooperation. That was kind of a
joke. It was us, between us, the South Vietnamese,
which they were trying to work in with our units so
that we could train them in our method of fighting.
But this time, Army troops had landed, United
States Army. The 25th Division came over, and I
believe at that time that elements of the 1st Air
Cav Division had already begun to land, too. yeah
well they were their helicopter assault troops
they're the old now cavalry is out of helicopters
used to be they were on horses but uh i believe those
two divisions along with the fourth division was
elements of the fourth division were already
landing we had i recall when the army came in to the
Chu Lai area. I don't remember which units of the
Army it was. They decided to have a cooperative or
combined operation between Marines, the United
States Army, and South Vietnamese, or what we
called ARVN forces, Army of the Republic of South
Vietnam. Operation cooperation was a real big
farce. We spent days and days and days walking
through the tulies, just getting hot and mesquite
a bit, and never saw hiding the hair of the enemy.
And after about six or seven days of this, nothing
to say for it but a lot of sore feet and extremely
tired, we finally did come on a village where we
were fired upon from a distance. Each respective
service fell back to their own training.
Kind of a beard.
What do you have on top? I'm
fine,
thank you. Anyway, this particular operation,
each respective service did their own thing. When
we were fired upon, the South Vietnamese
retreated to the rear as fast as they possibly
could. The Army dug in and started calling for air
support, and our Marine units attacked, because
that's the way we'd been trained. And naturally,
when you're on line and you're not supposed to go
forward of the other forces, when we attacked for
the advance, we were in front of the Army. The South
Vietnamese, not knowing which way the battle was
going, decided to fire upon the Army, and the Army
attacked in both directions with air and
artillery. We had an incoming fire on us. Air
strike came in on us then.
One of many. So the Army separate casualties from
the Army? Oh, yeah. There was a lot of friendly
casualties taken during the war. It was something
that they don't speak of too much in the history
books, but many, many men were wounded or killed
because of friendly fire, if you want to use that
term loosely. We were many, many times attacked by
the United States Air Force. Not blaming them.
They had an awful hard to tell from way up high who's
who on the ground. But that's just the fortune of
war. We were strafed by the South Vietnamese Air
Force. We were shelled by our own artillery so many
times that I thought that we had magnets drawing in
their shells. That just goes along with it. And I
suppose that's probably happened in every war.
It's nothing new. Anyway, after that, I went ahead
and served a half a tour of duty over there at that
time. Well, it was really been more than half. I
served about nine months in Vietnam. And I got
orders, came in, sending me back to Camp Pendleton
for further training.
I thought I was out of it for good, but I spent a total
of 60 days in Camp Pendleton, and then I was sent
back to Vietnam. And I was sent back to my old
outfit, same battalion, same regiment. However,
I was sent to a different company. I'd been in F
Company, or Foxtrot originally, and I was sent
back the second time to Echo Company, or E Company.
And I preferred going back to my old outfit. I was
glad that happened. That wasn't my plan. That was
just luck. They happened to be in the area, and I
was... I came back in to the right place at the right
time. My outfit moved north from Chu Lai. I came
back in. They were still at Chu Lai when I got there.
But shortly afterwards, we moved up to Marble
Mountain, which is in the area of Da Nang, in the
Marble Mountain area. But this time, the
operations had been formed into areas of
operation in Vietnam. We were in the I Corps area,
which was Chu Lai north. And then they had the...
three core areas of Vietnam that it was divided
into operational areas. I Corps would be the same
as first core area. And then they had a second and
third core down to the south. I never saw Saigon. I
never was down in the Mekong River Delta. I was
always north. I was from Chu Lai north and all the
major areas there. Marble Mountain.
was, like I said, outside of Da Nang. At Da Nang, we
had a big airfield. We also had a big harbor at Da
Nang for shipping. And the Marble Mountain area
was to secure that airfield and that harbor. We
were, at that time, caught up in the Vietnamese
Civil War. Are you running out of tape? Oh, no. It's
going fine. I'm going to get someone to pick you up
while I was racking it up.
What am I saying? We were at the Marble Mountain
defending Da Nang. At that time, it's when the
Civil War broke out between the South Vietnamese,
the Buddhists and the Catholics were fighting
out. We got caught in the middle of that, and my
outfit was sent to 3rd MAF Headquarters. The
Marine Corps had been divided into a Marine
amphibious force for this time, and it
represented the 3rd Marine Division, elements of
the 1st Marine Division, with support groups from
the Marine Air Wing and... various armor and
artillery units made up the entire 3rd Marine
Amphibious Force. We had at that time about six
infantry regiments with other supporting units
of Marines. At 3rd MAF headquarters, we were
attacked by the South Vietnamese. We had orders to
try, since they were our allies, not to fire on
them. but to fire over their heads as a warning.
When we took six casualties, six men were wounded.
I think one man was killed when Corsairs attacked
us from the South Vietnamese Air Force. We
eventually opened up with our weapons, returned
fire, and shot down one plane and damaged another
one until they pulled off. I guess our outfit got a
bad reputation or something because they pulled
us out of 3rd MAF after that. We were known to be too
radical or rebellious, shooting at the allies.
The South Vietnamese complained about us,
shooting down one of their planes. So they sent us
further north. We went to a place called Dong Ha.
No, I'm wrong. Fubai first. Went to Fubai. Fubai
had a little dinky airfield. It was really nothing
more than a cleared off dirt patch. At Fubai, uh, We
were setting up a major camp. We didn't know then
what it was for, but a lot of artillery, armor,
infantry units were building up there. We made
major defensive positions. Again, there was an
airfield at Phu Bai. We were also defending the
main artery on the ground, which was Highway 1,
which ran north-south through South Vietnam. We
had several bridges over rivers that we were
defending. We sent out outposts, and we even
manned some old French forts for a period of time
trying to defend the highway. We were involved in
this time Operation Texas, Operation Dodge City,
Operation J. Operation J was a particularly rough
operation. That involved... mainly the 4th
Marine Regiment, against
units of the 242nd B Division in the North
Vietnamese Army, and I don't know which regiments
it was. They did a pretty good job of fighting us. We
took quite a few casualties there, but we
eventually... This was the same place where a
French battalion was ambushed when the French was
there. They called it the Street of No Joy. At that
time, I think my company took about 70 casualties
on that particular operation. It lasted about
three weeks. We came in pretty weak, pretty hurt.
And they put us into R&R, in-country R&R, which was
a safe area. They moved us back down to a place north
of Da Nang that was supposed to be secure. We'd been
there about three days. This was after Operation
J. And we were on a hill. They had showers built
there for us. Even had a little PX truck that came
around once a week. Then we were attacked there.
Supposedly there was friendly forces between us
and the enemy, but somehow they got through. It was
a satchel charge attack, came in in the middle of
the night. And after that was over, we were ready to
go back to the front, wherever that was. The rear
area wasn't too safe either. After leaving Da Nang
the second time, we went up and started making our
major moves towards the Rock Pow and Kam Lo, which
later became known as Khe Sanh. Kam Lo originally
was called Artillery City because we started
breaking up a lot of big guns, self-propelled
80-inch 155 howitzers, shelling across the DMZ
into North Vietnam. We were trying at this point to
stop movement down the Ho Chi Minh Trail. And this
is a point on the trail where we could reach with the
big guns. Every night we would see Huff the Magic
Dragon, as we called it then. It was a Well,
it wasn't a C-130. It was a C-47 with a Gatling gun
shooting out the side. You could hear it for miles
away. It kind of made a roaring sound, and you could
see it look like Star Trek, just a straight red line
with a tracer fire coming down. We got entertained
by this, and then at night, too, the planes would
come over dropping photographic flares. along
the Ho Chi Minh Trail, taking pictures. We ran a lot
of patrols, and we had a lot of patrol activity, a
lot of skirmishes with patrols. It was almost a
daily occurrence that one of our patrols would run
into an enemy patrol and have a little firefight.
We moved up on Operation Hastings. Things started
getting really rough. We moved up to the rock pile.
The rock pile was a high area right along the DMZ. It
was very rough, and it was really nothing more than
a big pile of rocks out of the middle of the jungle.
It had been secured by the enemy because it made an
excellent observation post, as well as high
ground always is critical for controlling an area
of real estate. Our job at that time was to, what
they called a reconnaissance in force, to go in to
see how strong the enemy position was, to probe
their lines, and to see what kind of resistance we
got. And then they would determine from that how
much strength would be needed to assault and take
the position. The reconnaissance in force got in
over its head, as usually happens with
reconnaissance in forces, if that's correct
grammar. And once again, my company at this time, E
Company, 2nd Battalion, 4th Marines, we got
ambushed. We got held down by heavy fire, same
thing as ambush. And we took a lot of casualties. F
Company pulled us out the next day. We eventually
took the rock pile. We held that. We came back from
that position. And during the same operation, K
Company, 3rd Battalion, 4th Marines, was pretty
well wiped out. But we did see something kind of
unusual there. The enemy, I don't know which
division of the North Vietnamese Army it was.
Again, we were fighting NVA. Did you ever run
across VC? Yes, we did. I haven't mentioned the VC
very much. I don't think very much of them. I
consider them bandits. That's the way we thought
of them. I don't mind. The NVA troops were troops.
They were soldiers, as I started to say. In this
particular operation, the NVA was Operation
Hastings. Operation Hastings was designed to
stop what we then believed to be a major thrust from
North Vietnamese regulars. Operation Hastings
was one of the battles in the Vietnam War of super
size. It involved multiple regiments from both
sides. A regiment numbers around 4,000 men. By
T-O-N-E, our regiments were a little smaller. We
had in this operation the 4th Marines, which is 4th
Marine Regiment, the 7th Marines, the 3rd
Marines, and some units of the 9th Marines. I think
only one battalion, though. The 7th Marines was
from the 1st Marine Division. And then, of course,
there was various artillery and armored units in
support. We were going up against a division of the
North Vietnamese Army. Their divisions, if I
remember correctly, numbered about five
infantry regiments. Their T.O. and E. is a little
different than ours. Their battalions and
company shrinks were somewhat different. I
believe their regimental size was smaller than
our regimental size, although they had more
regiments to a division.
They
were pretty well equipped. A typical North
Vietnamese soldier wore a green olive drab
uniform but it was of a thinner material than ours.
They had tennis shoes for their footwear. They had
a lightweight helmet that was...
Like a pith helmet? More like a pith helmet, yes.
Okay, that's $150 and $1. Not exactly in the style
of the traditional British pith helmet, but like a
pith helmet. The same type of lightness of weight.
It was round in shape. Many of them would have a
khaki colored belt with a star on their belt
buckle. They had most generally equipped with
AK-47 Russian assault rifles, although some were
made in Czechoslovakia and Poland. A lot of them
were Chinese, too. as heavy weapons, a heavy
machine gun equivalent in size and firepower to
R-50 caliber. They had an 82 millimeter mortar,
which could fire R-81 millimeter rounds,
although you can guess R-81s couldn't fire their
82s. They had 57-millimeter anti-tank guns in
profusion. They never, to my knowledge, utilized
flamethrowers as we did. They had a lot of knee
mortars, or 60-millimeter mortars. It seems like
every squad had a knee mortar. They had more of the
light mortars than we did. We had given up our
combat commands, our infantry companies, after
World War II had taken the light mortar away. And we
only had heavy mortars in battalion support. We
had the 81, but it was in our headquarters and
support company for each battalion. Six 81s to a
battalion. They had probably 60 mortars to every
one of their companies. So they had a close... a
heavy weapon at close in. We had equivalent to
that. We had an M79 grenade launcher, which was an
anti-personnel weapon, which we had in every
squad. It wasn't quite as good as the 60 mortar, and
later we brought the 60 mortars into our company.
We brought them back and changed the TONE and
brought the 60s into every company.
As far as light weapons, again, the AK-47 was
popular, although they did have a lot of Browning
automatic weapons, BARs, American vintage, .30
caliber M1 Garands, the M1 rifle of World War II
vintage. They had carbines, which was a favorite
weapon of theirs, and they had pistols. Officers
normally carried 9mm pistols that were Russian or
Chinese or Eastern European. They had very little
in the way of air support. We had air superiority
most of the time. This particular operation was a
clash of major unit size. They had probably...
Infantry's a majority. They had greater numbers
in men than we did. We had a superiority in
material. We had more artillery at our beck and
call. We had air strike, air power. We had vast
superiority. They had no air power whatsoever.
They had their biggest weapon that came into play
was a 120 millimeter Russian rocket, which was a
pretty lethal weapon, and it was pretty accurate.
Also very frightening coming in by its sound. I'm
forgetting their RPGs,
rocket-powered grenades. They were pretty
nasty, too. We didn't have anything like that. We
had 3.5 rocket launchers, and we had the laws to
light anti-tank weapons, which were
rocket-powered. So... We had weapon
superiority. We had air superiority. And we could
call on naval strength offshore for, again,
airstrikes. And we were operating close enough to
the coast that occasionally we could get naval
gunfire support. We had a good supply of
artillery. Armor was not involved because the
terrain was not practical for the utilization of
armor. It was a test of infantry, primarily. uh it
got confusing in the very beginning we went in by
helicopters helicopters landed all over the
place and we were spread out over a huge area as big
as bryan college station combined and making this
assault we were right at the edge of the dmz the
first move that the enemy made was to set fire to the
jungle and the elephant grass which confused us
further. It had the effect of creating an
effective smoke screen, as well as the fire
blocked our avenues of attack. And it channeled us
up a river valley, which we could walk in the river
even though fire was falling on us from trees
overhead. This led to an ambush situation, which
we countered.